Adding a howto for building a trace receiver (#1288)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/collector/howto-receiver-trace.md

# Building a Traces Receiver

 If you are reading this tutorial, you probably already have an idea of what are the concepts behind traces and/or distribute traces, but if you don't you can quickly read through it here: [OpenTelemetry - Data Sources - Traces](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/data-sources/#traces).

 Here is the definition of those concepts according to OpenTelemetry:

>Traces track the progression of a single request, called a trace, as it is handled by services that make up an application. The request may be initiated by a user or an application. Distributed tracing is a form of tracing that traverses process, network and security boundaries.

> Although the definition seems very application centric, you can leverage OpenTelemetry traces as a way to represent a request and quickly understand it's duration and the details about every step involved in completing it.

Author: OpenTelemetry's traces model, I will refactor and make it explicit. 

As for the link, if you are referring to the traces datasource concept link, it's already there right before the definition.
If you are referring to the tracing signal content within the specification, I am making some references to it later on when I approach the trace model itself. At this point in the flow I am more focused on the receiver APIs.

Let me know if you think the link is needed here after you have gone through the whole content.

> The trace receiver's role is to convert the request telemetry from it's original format into the Otel trace format, so the information can be properly processed through the collector's pipelines.

Author: Fair point, I will work on it.

> The trace receiver's role is to convert the request telemetry from it's original format into the Otel trace format, so the information can be properly processed through the collector's pipelines.

Author: how about this: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/1288/commits/56e202d2a0a9181ead64cae14c68d2856a91cbf9

In order to implement a traces receiver you will need the following:

- A `Config` implementation to enable the trace receiver to gather and validate it's configurations within the collector's config.yaml.

- A `ReceiverFactory` implementation so the Collector can properly instantiate the trace receiver component

- A `TracesReceiver` implementation that is responsible to collect the telemetry, convert it to the internal Otel Trace format, and hand the information to the next consumer in the pipeline.

> In this tutorial we will create a sample trace receiver called `tracemock` that simulates a pull operation and generates traces as an outcome of that operation. The next sections will guide you through the process of implementing the steps above in order to create the receiver, so let's get started. 

Author: @jpkrohling, fixed as part of [5d70c54](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/1288/commits/5d70c546182ffe7a5b78fae96e38fb4bd65108ee)

## Setting up your receiver development and testing environment

First use the tutorial from the [builder](../../builder) folder to create a collector instance named `dev-otelcol`, all you need is to copy the [builder-config.yaml](../../builder/builder-config.yaml) file and make the following changes: 

```yaml
dist:

>     module: dev-otelcol # the module name for the new distribution, following Go mod conventions. Optional, but recommended.

Author: Yes, but I do have a question here:

If the only purpose of this collector's instance is to help you build a component and you have no intent of making it available for production purposes, does it matter?

    name: dev-otelcol # the binary name. Optional.
    output_path: ./dev-otelcol # the path to write the output (sources and binary). Optional.
```

> &nbsp;

Author: I feel there is something that you would like to change, but I am having a hard time figuring out with "?" as the comment :).

> &nbsp;

Reviewer: I'm confused as to why the nbsp is there.

> &nbsp;

Author: oh, that was just for formatting/spacing purpose.  I can take remove it if not needed.

As an outcome you should now have a [dev-otelcol](dev-otelcol) folder with your collectors development instance ready to go.

> In order to properly test your trace receiver, you will need a distributed tracing backend so the collector can send the telemetry to it. We will be using [JAEGER](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.30/getting-started), if you don't have a `JAEGER` instance running, you can easily stand one using docker with the following command:

Author: I actually meant "stand" but I am ok moving to "start".

```cmd
docker run -d --name jaeger \

>   -e COLLECTOR_ZIPKIN_HOST_PORT=:9411 \

Author: yup, that's what you get when you copy and paste the command. I will clean it up

>   -p 5775:5775/udp \

Author: yup, I will clean it up

  -p 6831:6831/udp \
  -p 6832:6832/udp \
  -p 5778:5778 \
  -p 16686:16686 \
  -p 14268:14268 \
  -p 14250:14250 \
  -p 9411:9411 \
  jaegertracing/all-in-one:1.29
```

> &nbsp;

Author: are we talking about the image, the tag or both?
Let me know and I will fix it.

> &nbsp;

Reviewer: The nbsp

> &nbsp;

Author: ahhh, replied to the other comment to soon! I will fix it.

> Now, create a config.yaml file so you can setup your collector's components. 

Author: backticks it is :)

}

// Validate checks if the receiver configuration is valid
func (cfg *Config) Validate() error {
    interval, _ := time.ParseDuration(cfg.Interval)
	if (interval.Minutes() < 1){
	   return fmt.Errorf("when defined, the interval has to be set to at least 1 minute (1m)")
	}

	if (cfg.NumberOfTraces < 1){
	   return fmt.Errorf("number_of_traces must be greater or equal to 1")
	}
	return nil
 }
```

>### Reviewing the code
>
>- I imported the `fmt` package, so I can properly format print my error messages.
>- I added the `Validate` method to my Config struct where I am checking if the `interval` setting value is at least 1 minute (1m) and if the `number_of_traces` setting value is greater or equal to 1. If that is not true the Collector will generate an error during it's startup process and display the message accordingly.

&nbsp;

If you want to take a closer look at the structs and interfaces involved in the configuration aspects of a receiver component, take a look at the [config/receiver.go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/receiver.go) file inside the Collector's GitHub project.

&nbsp;

> ## Enabling the Collector to instantiate your receiver.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, perhaps this should be merged with the 'Adding the receiver factory to the Collector's initialization' section.

>- Added a `time.Duration` constant called `defaultInterval` to represent the default value for our receiver's `Interval` setting. We will be setting the default value for 1 minute hence the assignment of `1 * time.Minute` as it's value.
>- Added a function called `createDefaultConfig` which is responsible to return a config.Receiver implementation, which in this case is going to be an instance of our `tracemock.Config` struct.   
>   - The `tracemock.Config.ReceiverSettings` field was initialized using the `config.NewReceiverSettings` function which returns a `config.ReceiverSettings` instance based on a given `config.ComponentID`.  
>   - To provide the proper `config.ComponentID`, we used the function `config.NewComponentID` which returns a `config.ComponentID` for the given `config.Type` which in our case is represented by the variable `typeStr`
>- The `tracemock.Config.Interval` field was initialized with the `defaultInterval` constant.

&nbsp;

> If you want to take a closer look at `ReceiverSettings` struct and `NewReceiverSettings` function within the [config/receiver.go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/receiver.go) file inside the Collector's GitHub project.

Author: @jpkrohling, fixed as part of [5d70c54](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/1288/commits/5d70c546182ffe7a5b78fae96e38fb4bd65108ee)

If you want to take a closer look at `ComponentID` struct and `NewComponentID` function within the [config/identifiable.go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/identifiable.go) file inside the Collector's GitHub project.

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

### Enabling the factory to describe the receiver as capable of processing traces
&nbsp;

The same receiver component can process traces, metrics and logs, and the receiver's factory is responsible to describe those capabilities. 

Given that Traces are the subject of the tutorial, that's the only datasource we will enable the `tracemock` receiver to work with. The `receiverhelper` package provides the following function and type to help the factory describe the trace processing capabilities:

```go

> func WithTraces(createTracesReceiver CreateTracesReceiver) FactoryOption

Author: you are probably right, what am I missing?

	return receiverhelper.NewFactory(
		typeStr,
		createDefaultConfig,
		receiverhelper.WithTraces(createTracesReceiver))
}
```
>### Reviewing the code
>
>- Importing the `context` package in order to support the `context.Context` type referenced in the `createTracesReceiver` function
>- Importing the `go.opentelemetry.io/collector/consumer` package in order to support the `consumer.Traces` type referenced in the `createTracesReceiver` function
>- Importing the `go.opentelemetry.io/collector/receiver/receiverhelper` package which is where the `NewFactory()` and the `WithTrace()` functions are declared.
>- Updated the `NewFactory()` function so it returns the `component.ReceiverFactory` generated by the `receiverhelper.NewFactory()` call with the required parameters. The generated receiver factory will be capable of processing traces through the call to `receiverhelper.WithTraces(createTracesReceiver)`

&nbsp;

At this point, you have the `tracemock` factory and config code needed for the Collector to validate the `tracemock` receiver settings if they are defined within the `config.yaml`. You just need to add it to the Collector's initialization process.

&nbsp;

&nbsp;

> ### Adding the receiver factory to the Collector's initialization

Reviewer: This should not be necessary when using the builder.

In order to properly test your trace receiver, you will need a distributed tracing backend so the Collector can send the telemetry to it. We will be using [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/latest/getting-started/), if you don't have a `Jaeger` instance running, you can easily start one using Docker with the following command:

```cmd
docker run -d --name jaeger \
  -p 16686:16686 \
  -p 14268:14268 \
  jaegertracing/all-in-one:1.29
```

Now, create a `config.yaml` file so you can setup your Collector's components. 

```cmd
cd dev-otelcol
touch config.yaml
```

  

For now, you just need a basic traces pipeline with the `otlp` receiver, the `jaeger` and `logging` exporters, here is what your `config.yaml` file should look like:

>config.yaml
```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
        endpoint: localhost:55680

processors:

exporters:
  logging:
    logLevel: debug
  jaeger:
    endpoint: localhost:14250
    tls:
      insecure: true

service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: []
      exporters: [jaeger, logging]
```

  

> In order to verify that your initial pipeline is properly setup, you should have the following output after running your `dev-otelcol` command: 

Author: done

```

  

Under the `tailtracer` folder, create a file named `config.go` where you will write all the code to support your receiver settings.

  

```cmd
cd tailtracer
touch config.go
```

  

To implement the configuration aspects of a receiver you need create a `Config` struct, so go ahead the add the following code to your `config.go` file:

```go
package tailtracer

type Config struct{

}
```

  

In order to be able to give your receiver access to it's settings the `Config` struct must:

- embed the [config.ReceiverSettings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/v0.53.0/config/receiver.go#L42) struct or a struct that extends it.

- Add a field for each of the receiver's settings.

Here is what your config.go file should look like after you implemented the requirements above

>config.go
```go
package tailtracer

import (
  "go.opentelemetry.io/collector/config"
)

// Config represents the receiver config settings within the collector's config.yaml
type Config struct {
   config.ReceiverSettings `mapstructure:",squash"`
   Interval    string `mapstructure:"interval"`
   NumberOfTraces int `mapstructure:"number_of_traces"`
}

```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

In this case, the `interval` value will be optional (we will look at generating default values later) but when defined should be at least 1 minute (1m) and the the `number_of_traces` will be a required value. Here is what the config.go looks like after implementing the `Validate` method.

>config.go
```go
package tailtracer

import (
  "fmt"
  "go.opentelemetry.io/collector/config"
)

// Config represents the receiver config settings within the collector's config.yaml
type Config struct {
   config.ReceiverSettings `mapstructure:",squash"`
   Interval    string `mapstructure:"interval"`
   NumberOfTraces int `mapstructure:"number_of_traces"`
}

// Validate checks if the receiver configuration is valid
func (cfg *Config) Validate() error {
    interval, _ := time.ParseDuration(cfg.Interval)
	if (interval.Minutes() < 1){
	   return fmt.Errorf("when defined, the interval has to be set to at least 1 minute (1m)")
	}

	if (cfg.NumberOfTraces < 1){
	   return fmt.Errorf("number_of_traces must be greater or equal to 1")
	}
	return nil
 }
```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

  

  

### Implementing your ReceiverFactory
  

Start by creating a file named factory.go within the `tailtracer` folder

```cmd
cd tailtracer
touch factory.go
```

  

Now let's follow the convention and add a function named `NewFactory()` that will be responsible to instantiate the `tailtracer` factory. Go ahead the add the following code to your `factory.go` file:

```go
package tailtracer

import (
	"go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component"
)

// NewFactory creates a factory for tailtracer receiver.
func NewFactory() component.ReceiverFactory {

}
```

  

In order to instantiate your `tailtracer` receiver factory, you will use the  following function from the `component` package:

```go
func NewReceiverFactory(cfgType config.Type, createDefaultConfig ReceiverCreateDefaultConfigFunc, options ...ReceiverFactoryOption)) component.ReceiverFactory
```

  

> The `component.NewReceiverFactory()` instantiate and returns a `component.ReceiverFactory` and it requires the following parameters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `component.NewReceiverFactory()` instantiates and returns a `component.ReceiverFactory` and it requires the following parameters:
```

- `config.Type`: A config.Type instance representing a unique identifier for your receiver across all Collector's components.

- `ReceiverCreateDefaultConfigFunc`: A reference to a function that returns the config.Receiver instance for your receiver.

> - `... ReceiverFactoryOption`: The slice of ReceiverFactoryOptions that will determine what type of MELT datasource your receiver is capable of processing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `... ReceiverFactoryOption`: The slice of ReceiverFactoryOptions that will determine what type of signal your receiver is capable of processing.
```

>   - To provide the proper `config.ComponentID`, we used the function `config.NewComponentID` which returns a `config.ComponentID` for the given `config.Type` which in our case is represented by the variable `typeStr`
>- The `tailtracer.Config.Interval` field was initialized with the `defaultInterval` constant.

  

If you take a closer look at the `ReceiverSettings` struct and `NewReceiverSettings` function (they are declared within the [config/receiver.go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/v0.53.0/config/receiver.go) file inside the Collector's GitHub project), you will find out that the `ReceiverSettings` is implementing the methods to support the `identifiable` interface which are also required by any Collector's component.

All the types and functions involved in supporting the requirements for component's identification are implemented within the [config/identifiable.go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/v0.53.0/config/identifiable.go) file inside the Collector's GitHub project.

  

  

### Enabling the factory to describe the receiver as capable of processing traces
  

> The same receiver component can process traces, metrics and logs, and the receiver's factory is responsible to describe those capabilities. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The same receiver component can process traces, metrics, and logs. The receiver's factory is responsible for describing those capabilities. 
```

```go
func WithTracesReceiver(createTracesReceiver CreateTracesReceiver) ReceiverFactoryOption
type CreateTracesReceiver func(context.Context, component.ReceiverCreateSettings, config.Receiver, consumer.Traces) (component.TracesReceiver, error)
```

  

The `component.WithTracesReceiver()` instantiate and returns a `component.ReceiverFactoryOption` and it requires the following parameters:
- `CreateTracesReceiver`: A reference to a function that matches the `component.CreateTracesReceiver` type 

  

The `component.CreateTracesReceiver` type is a pointer to a function that is responsible to instantiate and return a `component.TraceReceiver` instance and it requires the following parameters:
- `context.Context`: the reference to the Collector's `context.Context` so your trace receiver can properly manage it's execution context.
- `component.ReceiverCreateSettings`: the reference to some of the Collector's settings under which your receiver is created. 
- `config.Receiver`: the reference for the receiver config settings passed by the Collector to the factory so it can properly read it's settings from the Collector config.

> - `consumer.Traces`: the reference to the `consumer.Traces` responsible to pass the traces generated by your receiver to the next consumer/step (most likely a processor or exporter) configured in the traces pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `consumer.Traces`: the reference to the next `consumer.Traces` in the pipeline, which is where received traces will go. This is either a processor or an exporter.
```

All the receiver API's responsible to enable the datasources are currently declared in the [component/receiver.go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/v0.53.0/component/receiver.go) file within the OTel Collector's project in GitHub, open the file and take a minute to browse through all the interfaces declared in it. 

Notice that `component.TracesReceiver` (and it's siblings `component.MetricsReceiver` and `component.LogsReceiver`) at this point in time, doesn't describe any specific methods other than the ones it "inherits" from `component.Receiver` which also doesn't describe any specific methods other than the ones it "inherits" from `component.Component`. 

It might feel weird, but remember, the Collector's API was meant to be extensible, and the components and their datasources might evolve in different ways, so the role of those interfaces exist to help support that. 

So, to create a `component.TracesReceiver`, you just need to implement the following methods described by `component.Component` interface:

```go
Start(ctx context.Context, host Host) error
Shutdown(ctx context.Context) error
```

> Both methods actually act as event handlers used by the Collector to communicate with it's components as part of their lifecycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both methods actually act as event handlers used by the Collector to communicate with its components as part of their lifecycle.
```

> The `Start()` represents a signal of the Collector telling the component to start it's processing. As part of the event, the Collector will pass the following information:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Start()` represents a signal of the Collector telling the component to start its processing. As part of the event, the Collector will pass the following information:
```

	return nil
}

func (tailtracerRcvr *tailtracerReceiver) Shutdown(context.Context) error {
	return nil
}
```
>### Reviewing the code
>
>- Importing the `context` package which is where the `Context` type and functions are declared
>- Importing the `go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component` package which is where the `Host` type is declared
>- Added a bootstrap implementation of the `Start(ctx context.Context, host component.Host)` method to comply with the `component.TraceReceiver` interface. 
>- Added a bootstrap implementation of the `Shutdown(ctx context.Context)` method to comply with the `component.TraceReceiver` interface. 

  

The `Start()` method is passing 2 references (`context.Context` and `component.Host`) that your receiver might need to keep so they can be used as part of it's processing operations. 

The `context.Context` reference should be used for creating a new context to support you receiver processing operations, and in that case you will need to decide the best way to handle context cancellation so you can finalize it properly as part of the component's shutdown within the `Shutdown()` method.

> The `component.Host` might be useful during the whole lifecycle of the receiver so you might want to keep that reference within your `tailtracerReceiver` type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `component.Host` can be useful during the whole lifecycle of the receiver so you should keep that reference within your `tailtracerReceiver` type.
```

```go
type tailtracerReceiver struct {
  host component.Host
  cancel context.CancelFunc
}
```

  

Now you need to update the `Start()` methods so the receiver can properly initialize it's own processing context and have the cancellation function kept in the `cancel` field and also initialize it's `host` field value. You will also update the `Stop()` method in order to finalize the context by calling the `cancel` function.

Here is what the `trace-receiver.go` file look like after making the changes above:

>trace-receiver.go
```go
package tailtracer

import (
	"context"
	"go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component"
)

type tailtracerReceiver struct {
    host component.Host
	cancel context.CancelFunc
}

func (tracemokRcvr *tailtracerReceiver) Start(ctx context.Context, host component.Host) error {
    tracemokRcvr.host = host
    ctx = context.Background()
	ctx, tracemokRcvr.cancel = context.WithCancel(ctx)
 
	return nil
}

func (tracemokRcvr *tailtracerReceiver) Shutdown(ctx context.Context) error {
	tracemokRcvr.cancel()
	return nil
}

```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

>- Updated the `Start()` method by adding the initialization to the `host` field with the `component.Host` reference passed by the Collector and the `cancel` function field with the cancellation based on a new context created with `context.Background()` (according the Collector's API documentation suggestions).  
>- Updated the `Stop()` method by adding a call to the `cancel()` context cancellation function.

  

  

### Keeping information passed by the receiver's factory
  

> Now that you have implemented the `component.TraceReceiver` interface methods, your `tailtracer` receiver component is ready to be instantiated and returned by it's factory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you have implemented the `component.TraceReceiver` interface methods, your `tailtracer` receiver component is ready to be instantiated and returned by its factory.
```

Open the `tailtracer/factory.go` file and navigate to the `createTracesReceiver()` function. Notice that the factory will pass references as part of the `createTracesReceiver()` function parameters that your receiver actually requires to work properly like it's configuration settings (`config.Receiver`), the next `Consumer` in the pipeline that will consume the generated traces (`consumer.Traces`) and the Collector's logger so the `tailtracer` receiver can add meaningful events to it (`component.ReceiverCreateSettings`).

> Given that all this information will be only  made available to the receiver at the moment it's instantiated by the factory, The `tailtracerReceiver` type will need fields to keep that information and use it within other stages of it's lifecycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given that all this information will be only be made available to the receiver at the moment its instantiated by the factory, The `tailtracerReceiver` type will need fields to keep that information and use it within other stages of its lifecycle.
```

Here is what the `trace-receiver.go` file looks like with the updated `tailtracerReceiver` type declaration:

>trace-receiver.go
```go
package tailtracer

import (
	"context"
	"go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component"
	"go.opentelemetry.io/collector/consumer"
	"go.uber.org/zap"
	
)

type tailtracerReceiver struct {
    host         component.Host
	cancel       context.CancelFunc
	logger       *zap.Logger
	nextConsumer consumer.Traces
	config       *Config
}

func (tracemokRcvr *tailtracerReceiver) Start(ctx context.Context, host component.Host) error {
    tracemokRcvr.host = host
    ctx = context.Background()
	ctx, tracemokRcvr.cancel = context.WithCancel(ctx)
 
	interval, _ := time.ParseDuration(tracemokRcvr.config.Interval)
	go func() {
		ticker := time.NewTicker(interval)
		defer ticker.Stop()

		for {
			select {
			case <-ticker.C:
				tracemokRcvr.logger.Info("I should start processing traces now!")
			case <-ctx.Done():
				return
			}
		}
	}()

	return nil
}

func (tracemokRcvr *tailtracerReceiver) Shutdown(ctx context.Context) error {
	tracemokRcvr.cancel()
	return nil
}

```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

>- Importing the `go.uber.org/zap` package, which is what the Collector uses for it's logging capabilities.
>- Added a `zap.Logger` field named `logger` so we can have access to the Collector's logger reference from within the receiver.
>- Added a `consumer.Traces` field named `nextConsumer` so we can push the traces generated by the `tailtracer` receiver to the next consumer declared in the Collector's pipeline.
>- Added a `Config` field named `config` so we can have access to receiver's configuration settings defined within the Collector's config.
>- Added a variable named `interval` that will be initialized as a `time.Duration` based on the value of the `interval` settings of the `tailtracer` receiver defined within the Collector's config.  
>- Added a `go func()` to implement the `ticker` mechanism so our receiver can generate traces every time the `ticker` reaches the amount of time specified by the `interval` variable and used the `tracemokRcvr.logger` field to generate a info message every time the receiver supposed to be generating traces.

  

> The `tailtracerReceiver` type is now ready to be instantiated and keep all  meaningful information passed by it's factory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `tailtracerReceiver` type is now ready to be instantiated and keep all meaningful information passed by its factory.
```

Open the `tailtracer/factory.go` file and navigate to the `createTracesReceiver()` function. 

The receiver is only instantiated if it's declared as a component within a pipeline and the factory is responsible to make sure the next consumer (either a processor or exporter) in the pipeline is valid otherwise it should generate an error. 

> The Collector's api provides some standard error types to help the factory handle pipeline configurations. Your receiver factory should throw a `component.ErrNilNextConsumer` in case the next consumer has an issue and is passed as nil.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Collector's API provides some standard error types to help the factory handle pipeline configurations. Your receiver factory should throw a `component.ErrNilNextConsumer` in case the next consumer has an issue and is passed as nil.
```

>factory.go
```go
package tailtracer

import (
	"context"

	"go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component"
	"go.opentelemetry.io/collector/config"
	"go.opentelemetry.io/collector/consumer"
)

const (
	typeStr = "tailtracer"
	defaultInterval = "1m"
)

func createDefaultConfig() config.Receiver {
	return &Config{
		ReceiverSettings:   config.NewReceiverSettings(config.NewComponentID(typeStr)),
		Interval: defaultInterval,
	}
}

func createTracesReceiver(_ context.Context, params component.ReceiverCreateSettings, baseCfg config.Receiver, consumer consumer.Traces) (component.TracesReceiver, error) {
	if consumer == nil {
		return nil, component.ErrNilNextConsumer
	}
	
	logger := params.Logger
	tailtracerCfg := baseCfg.(*Config)

	traceRcvr := &tailtracerReceiver{
		logger:       logger,
		nextConsumer: consumer,
		config:       tailtracerCfg,
	}
	
	return traceRcvr, nil

}

// NewFactory creates a factory for tailtracer receiver.
func NewFactory() component.ReceiverFactory {
	return component.NewReceiverFactory(
		typeStr,
		createDefaultConfig,
		component.WithTracesReceiver(createTracesReceiver))
}
```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

2022-03-03T11:20:14.652-0600    info    service/collector.go:255        Starting shutdown...
2022-03-03T11:20:14.652-0600    info    service/service.go:121  Stopping receivers...
2022-03-03T11:20:14.653-0600    info    tailtracer/trace-receiver.go:29  I am done and ready to shutdown!        {"kind": "receiver", "name": "tailtracer"}
2022-03-03T11:20:14.653-0600    info    service/service.go:126  Stopping processors...
2022-03-03T11:20:14.653-0600    info    builder/pipelines_builder.go:73 Pipeline is shutting down...    {"name": "pipeline", "name": "traces"}
2022-03-03T11:20:14.653-0600    info    builder/pipelines_builder.go:77 Pipeline is shutdown.   {"name": "pipeline", "name": "traces"}
2022-03-03T11:20:14.653-0600    info    service/service.go:131  Stopping exporters...
2022-03-03T11:20:14.653-0600    info    service/service.go:136  Stopping extensions...
2022-03-03T11:20:14.653-0600    info    service/collector.go:273        Shutdown complete.
```
  

As you can see there is an info log line for the `tailtracer` receiver which means the component is responding correctly to the `Shutdown()` event.

> In the next section you will learn more about the OTel Trace data model so the `tailtracer` receiver can finally generate traces!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the next section you will learn more about the OpenTelemetry Trace data model so the `tailtracer` receiver can finally generate traces!
```

## The Collector's Trace Data Model

> You might be familiar with OTel traces by using the SDKs and instrumenting an application so you can see and evaluate your traces within a distributed tracing backend like Jaeger. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might be familiar with OpenTelemetry traces by using the SDKs and instrumenting an application so you can see and evaluate your traces within a distributed tracing backend like Jaeger. 
```

Here is what a trace looks like in Jaeger:

> ![Jaeger trace](images/Jaeger.jpeg)

Reviewer 2: For all images, please add them to `/static/img/docs/<newDir>/` and reference them as `(/img/docs/<newDir>/<image>`.

Author: done

    OSVersion     string
	CloudProvider string
	CloudRegion   string	
	Endpoint      string
}

func generateAtm() Atm{
	i := getRandomNumber(1, 2)
    var newAtm Atm

	switch i {
		case 1:
			newAtm = Atm{
				ID: 111,
				Name: "ATM-111-IL",
				SerialNumber: "atmxph-2022-111",
				Version: "v1.0",
				ISPNetwork: "comcast-chicago",
				StateID: "IL",
		
			}
		
		case 2:
			newAtm = Atm{
				ID: 222,
				Name: "ATM-222-CA",
				SerialNumber: "atmxph-2022-222",
				Version: "v1.0",
				ISPNetwork: "comcast-sanfrancisco",
				StateID: "CA",
			}
	}

	return newAtm
}

func generateBackendSystem() BackendSystem{
    i := getRandomNumber(1, 3)

	newBackend := BackendSystem{
    	ProcessName: "accounts",
		Version: "v2.5",
		OSType: "lnx",
		OSVersion: "4.16.10-300.fc28.x86_64",
		CloudProvider: "amzn",
		CloudRegion: "us-east-2",
	}

	switch i {
		case 1:
		 	newBackend.Endpoint = "api/v2.5/balance"
		case 2:
		  	newBackend.Endpoint = "api/v2.5/deposit"
		case 3:
			newBackend.Endpoint = "api/v2.5/withdrawn"

	}

	return newBackend
}

func getRandomNumber(min int, max int) int {
	rand.Seed(time.Now().UnixNano())
	i := (rand.Intn(max - min + 1) + min)
    return i	
}
```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

You will start with a type called `ptrace.ResourceSpans` which represents the resource and all the operations that it either originated or received while participating in a trace. You can find it's definition within the [/pdata/internal/data/protogen/trace/v1/trace.pb.go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/v0.50.0/pdata/internal/data/protogen/trace/v1/trace.pb.go). 

`ptrace.Traces` has a method named `ResourceSpans()` which returns an instance of a helper type called `ptrace.ResourceSpansSlice`. The `ptrace.ResourceSpansSlice` type has methods to help you handle the array of `ptrace.ResourceSpans` that will contain as many items as the number of `Resource` entities participating in the request represented by the trace.

`ptrace.ResourceSpansSlice` has a method named `AppendEmpty()` that adds a new `ptrace.ResourceSpan` to the array and return it's reference.

> Once you have an instance of a  `ptrace.ResourceSpan` you will use a method named `Resource()` which will return the instance of the `pcommon.Resource` associated with the `ResourceSpan`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have an instance of a `ptrace.ResourceSpan` you will use a method named `Resource()` which will return the instance of the `pcommon.Resource` associated with the `ResourceSpan`.
```

Update the `generateTrace()` function with the following changes:
- add a variable named `resourceSpan` to represent the `ResourceSpan`
- add a variable named `atmResource` to represent the `pcommon.Resource` associated with the `ResourceSpan`. 
- Use the methods mentioned above to initialize both variables respectively. 

Here is what the function should look like after you implemented these changes:

 ```go
func generateTraces() ptrace.Traces{
	traces := ptrace.NewTraces()

	for i := 0; i <= numberOfTraces; i++{
		newAtm := generateAtm()
		newBackendSystem := generateBackendSystem()

		resourceSpan := traces.ResourceSpans().AppendEmpty()
		atmResource := resourceSpan.Resource()
	}

	return traces
}
```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

When creating your own attributes to represent your own telemetry generation entities, you should follow the guideline provided by the specification:

>Attributes are grouped logically by the type of the concept that they described. Attributes in the same group have a common prefix that ends with a dot. For example all attributes that describe Kubernetes properties start with "k8s."

Let's start by opening the `tailtracer/model.go` and adding `go.opentelemetry.io/collector/pdata/pcommon` to the `import` clause so you can have access to the `pcommon` package capabilities.

Now go ahead and add a function to read the field values from an `Atm` instance and write them as attributes (grouped by the prefix "atm.") into a `pcommon.Resource` instance. Here is what the function looks like:

```go
func fillResourceWithAtm(resource *pcommon.Resource, atm Atm){
   atmAttrs := resource.Attributes()
   atmAttrs.InsertInt("atm.id", atm.ID)
   atmAttrs.InsertString("atm.stateid", atm.StateID)
   atmAttrs.InsertString("atm.ispnetwork", atm.ISPNetwork)
   atmAttrs.InsertString("atm.serialnumber", atm.SerialNumber)
}
```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

}

func fillResourceWithBackendSystem(resource *pdata.Resource, backend BackendSystem){
	backendAttrs := resource.Attributes()
	var osType, cloudProvider string

	switch {
		case backend.CloudProvider == "amzn":
			cloudProvider = conventions.AttributeCloudProviderAWS
		case backend.OSType == "mcrsft":
			cloudProvider = conventions.AttributeCloudProviderAzure
		case backend.OSType == "gogl":
			cloudProvider = conventions.AttributeCloudProviderGCP		
	}

	backendAttrs.InsertString(conventions.AttributeCloudProvider, cloudProvider)
	backendAttrs.InsertString(conventions.AttributeCloudRegion, backend.CloudRegion)
	
	switch {
		case backend.OSType == "lnx":
			osType = conventions.AttributeOSTypeLinux
		case backend.OSType == "wndws":
			osType = conventions.AttributeOSTypeWindows
		case backend.OSType == "slrs":
			osType = conventions.AttributeOSTypeSolaris			
	}
	
	backendAttrs.InsertString(conventions.AttributeOSType, osType)
	backendAttrs.InsertString(conventions.AttributeOSVersion, backend.OSVersion)

	backendAttrs.InsertString(conventions.AttributeServiceName, backend.ProcessName)
	backendAttrs.InsertString(conventions.AttributeServiceVersion, backend.Version)

 }
```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

>

> >- Imported the `go.opentelemetry.io/collector/model/semconv/v1.9.0` package as `conventions`, in order to have access to all resource semantic conventions attribute names and values.

Reviewer 2: Check this version number and make sure it's correct

As part of the `generateBackendSystem()` function, we have randomly assigned the operations that the `BackEndSystem` entity can provide as services to the system. We will now open the `tailtracer/model.go` file and a function called `appendTraceSpans()` that will be responsible to create a trace and append spans representing the `BackendSystem` operations. Here is what the initial implementation for the `appendTraceSpans()` function looks like:

```go
func appendTraceSpans(backend *BackendSystem, backendScopeSpans *ptrace.ScopeSpans, atmScopeSpans *ptrace.ScopeSpans){
	traceId := NewTraceID()
	backendSpanId := NewSpanID()

	backendDuration, _ := time.ParseDuration("1s")
    backendSpanStartTime := time.Now()
    backendSpanFinishTime := backendSpanStartTime.Add(backendDuration)

	backendSpan := backendScopeSpans.Spans().AppendEmpty()
	backendSpan.SetTraceID(traceId)
	backendSpan.SetSpanID(backendSpanId)
	backendSpan.SetName(backend.Endpoint)
	backendSpan.SetKind(pdata.SpanKindServer)
	backendSpan.SetStartTimestamp(pdata.NewTimestampFromTime(backendSpanStartTime))
	backendSpan.SetEndTimestamp(pdata.NewTimestampFromTime(backendSpanFinishTime))

}
```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

>
>- Added `traceId` and `backendSpanId` variables to respectively represent the trace and the span id and initialized them with the helper functions created previously
>- Added `backendSpanStartTime` and `backendSpanFinishTime` to represent the start and the end time of the operation. For the tutorial, any `BackendSystem` operation will take 1 second.
>- Added a variable called `backendSpan` which will hold the instance of the `ptrace.Span` representing this operation.
>- Setting the `Name` of the span with the `Endpoint` field value from the `BackendSystem` instance
>- Setting the `Kind` of the span as `ptrace.SpanKindServer`. Take a look at [SpanKind section](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind) within the trace specification to understand how to properly define SpanKind.

> >- Used all the methods mentioned before to fill the `ptrace.Span` with the proper values to represent the `BakendSytem` operation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>- Used all the methods mentioned before to fill the `ptrace.Span` with the proper values to represent the `BackendSystem` operation
```

`consumer.Traces` has a method called `ConsumeTraces()` which is responsible to push the generated traces to the next consumer in the pipeline. All you need to do now is to update the `Start()` method within the `tailtracerReceiver` type and add the code to use it.

Open the `tailtracer/trace-receiver.go` file and update the `Start()` method as follow:

```go
func (tracemokRcvr *tailtracerReceiver) Start(ctx context.Context, host component.Host) error {
    tracemokRcvr.host = host
    ctx = context.Background()
	ctx, tracemokRcvr.cancel = context.WithCancel(ctx)
 
	interval, _ := time.ParseDuration(tracemokRcvr.config.Interval)
	go func() {
		ticker := time.NewTicker(interval)
		defer ticker.Stop()
		for {
			select {
			case <-ticker.C:
				tracemokRcvr.logger.Info("I should start processing traces now!")
				tracemokRcvr.nextConsumer.ConsumeTraces(ctx, generateTraces())
			case <-ctx.Done():
				return
			}
		}
	}()

	return nil
}
```

> >### Reviewing the code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>### Check Your Work
```

# Building a Traces Receiver

>  If you are reading this tutorial, you probably already have an idea of the OpenTelemetry concepts behind distributed tracing, but if you don't you can quickly read through it [here](/content/en/docs/concepts/signals/traces.md).

Reviewer 3: The link should be just `/docs/concepts/signals/traces`.

Author: yup, just fixed it.

 Here is the definition of those concepts according to OpenTelemetry:

>Traces track the progression of a single request, called a trace, as it is handled by services that make up an application. The request may be initiated by a user or an application. Distributed tracing is a form of tracing that traverses process, network and security boundaries.

Although the definition seems very application centric, you can leverage the OpenTelemetry trace model as a way to represent a request and quickly understand it's duration and the details about every step involved in completing it.

> Assuming you already have a system generating some kind of tracing telemetry, [the OpenTelemetry Collector](/content/en/docs/collector/_index.md) is the doorway to help you make it available into the OTel world.

Author: yup, learning to use references now :)

---
title: Building a Trace Receiver

> ---

Reviewer 3: @rquedas - I've added Hugo front-matter so that the page gets properly published and listed in the side-nav, etc.

All: I made "Trace" singular.
